Hemophilia is a bleeding disorder that slows the blood clotting process. People with this condition experience prolonged bleeding or oozing following an injury, surgery, or having a tooth pulled. In severe cases of hemophilia, continuous bleeding occurs after minor trauma or even in the absence of injury (spontaneous bleeding). Serious complications can result from bleeding into the joints, muscles, brain, or other internal organs. Milder forms of hemophilia do not necessarily involve spontaneous bleeding, and the condition may not become apparent until abnormal bleeding occurs following surgery or a serious injury.

The major types of this condition are hemophilia A (also known as classic hemophilia or factor VIII deficiency) and hemophilia B (also known as Christmas disease or factor IX deficiency). Although the two types have very similar signs and symptoms, they are caused by mutations in different genes. People with an unusual form of hemophilia B, known as hemophilia B Leyden, experience episodes of excessive bleeding in childhood but have few bleeding problems after puberty.

The two major forms of hemophilia occur much more commonly in males than in females. Hemophilia A is the most common type of the condition; 1 in 4,000 to 1 in 5,000 males worldwide are born with this disorder. Hemophilia B occurs in approximately 1 in 20,000 newborn males worldwide.

Changes in the F8 gene are responsible for hemophilia A, while mutations in the F9 gene cause hemophilia B. The F8 gene provides instructions for making a protein called coagulation factor VIII. A related protein, coagulation factor IX, is produced from the F9 gene. Coagulation factors are proteins that work together in the blood clotting process. After an injury, blood clots protect the body by sealing off damaged blood vessels and preventing excessive blood loss.

Mutations in the F8 or F9 gene lead to the production of an abnormal version of coagulation factor VIII or coagulation factor IX, or reduce the amount of one of these proteins. The altered or missing protein cannot participate effectively in the blood clotting process. As a result, blood clots cannot form properly in response to injury. These problems with blood clotting lead to continuous bleeding that can be difficult to control. The mutations that cause severe hemophilia almost completely eliminate the activity of coagulation factor VIII or coagulation factor IX. The mutations responsible for mild and moderate hemophilia reduce but do not eliminate the activity of one of these proteins.

Another form of the disorder, known as acquired hemophilia, is not caused by inherited gene mutations. This rare condition is characterized by abnormal bleeding into the skin, muscles, or other soft tissues, usually beginning in adulthood. Acquired hemophilia results when the body makes specialized proteins called autoantibodies that attack and disable coagulation factor VIII. The production of autoantibodies is sometimes associated with pregnancy, immune system disorders, cancer, or allergic reactions to certain drugs. In about half of cases, the cause of acquired hemophilia is unknown.

Hemophilia refers to a group of inherited disorders that cause abnormal bleeding. The bleeding occurs because part of the blood -- the fluid part called plasma -- has too little of a protein that helps blood clot.

Symptoms of hemophilia range from increased bleeding after trauma, injury, or surgery to sudden bleeding with no apparent cause. There are two types of hemophilia:
Hemophilia A -- also called classic hemophilia -- is most common and occurs in about 80% of people with hemophilia.
Hemophilia B -- also called Christmas disease -- is less common and occurs in about 20% of people with hemophilia.

Hemophilia A
Hemophilia A results from too little of a plasma protein called factor VIII, which helps blood clot. The greater the deficiency, the more severe the symptoms.

Mild hemophilia: 5% to 40% of the normal factor VIII level
Moderate hemophilia: 1% to 5% of the normal factor VIII level
Severe hemophilia: Less than 1% of the normal factor VIII level

Most people who have hemophilia A have moderate or severe symptoms.

Hemophilia B
Hemophilia B results from too little of a plasma protein called factor IX, which helps blood clot. As in hemophilia A, hemophilia B can be mild, moderate, or severe. The greater the deficiency, the more severe the symptoms.

Recognizing Hemophilia
If there is no family history of hemophilia, an infant would not be tested for the condition. However, if there is a family history of hemophilia, specific tests can be done from an umbilical cord blood sample to see if a newborn infant has hemophilia. In fact, if the family desires, such testing can be done before a child is born.

In moderate to severe hemophilia, most boys present with bleeding within their first 18 months of life. Symptoms in infants and children include:
Bleeding in the head during birth 
Swollen, bruised joints or muscles when learning to walk
Bleeding into joints spontaneously or from just learning to walk 
Bruising easily, from minor bumps 
Frequent nose bleeds or gum bleeds from teething or tooth brushing 
Bloody urine or stools

For mild hemophilia, you may not have any noticeable symptoms until you undergo a dental procedure, which may cause you to bleed heavily, or you may not have any unusual bleeding unless you are injured in an accident or have surgery.

Problems Caused by Hemophilia
Internal bleeding resulting from hemophilia may lead to several health problems, including:

Joint deformity: People with severe hemophilia may suffer spontaneous bleeding in the joints. People with less severe hemophilia may have bleeding in a joint if they fall or are injured. If joint bleeds are not promptly and adequately treated, joint deformity can occur. Bleeding in a joint can cause scarring in the joint. With repeated bleeds, the joint may lose mobility and result in a permanent limp. The knee, ankle, and elbow joints are most commonly affected. Bleeding into the muscles of the legs can also be severely disabling.
Blood in urine: Blood in the urine may occur on occasion, due to bleeding from the kidneys or bladder. If the bleeding is heavy, you can get blood clots that obstruct urine flow.
Problems breathing: Breathing problems can occur as a result of bleeding into the throat, nose bleeds, coughing or vomiting. If not promptly treated, bleeding in the throat can interfere with breathing so much that a patient may need to be put onto a ventilator until the bleeding stops and swelling goes down.
Brain damage: Bleeding in the brain may cause permanent brain damage and disability or even death. While usually caused by trauma, in very severe cases of hemophilia, these areas may bleed without known injury.

Hemophilia is a genetic disease caused by inheritance of a mutated gene on the mother's X chromosome. 

a medical condition in which the ability of the blood to clot is severely reduced, causing the sufferer to bleed severely from even a slight injury. The condition is typically caused by a hereditary lack of a coagulation factor, most often factor VIII.