At the entrance to your stomach is a valve, which is a ring of muscle called the lower esophageal sphincter (LES). Normally, the LES closes as soon as food passes through it. If the LES doesn't close all the way or if it opens too often, acid produced by your stomach can move up into your esophagus. This can cause symptoms such as a burning chest pain called heartburn. If acid reflux symptoms happen more than twice a week, you have acid reflux disease, also known as gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
What Causes Acid Reflux Disease?
One common cause of acid reflux disease is a stomach abnormality called a hiatal hernia. This occurs when the upper part of the stomach and LES move above the diaphragm, a muscle that separates your stomach from your chest. Normally, the diaphragm helps keep acid in our stomach. But if you have a hiatal hernia, acid can move up into your esophagus and cause symptoms of acid reflux disease.
These are other common risk factors for acid reflux disease:
Eating large meals or lying down right after a meal
Being overweight or obese
Eating a heavy meal and lying on your back or bending over at the waist
Snacking close to bedtime
Eating certain foods, such as citrus, tomato, chocolate, mint, garlic, onions, or spicy or fatty foods
Drinking certain beverages, such as alcohol, carbonated drinks, coffee, or tea
Smoking
Being pregnant
Taking aspirin, ibuprofen, certain muscle relaxers, or blood pressure medications
What Are the Symptoms of Acid Reflux Disease?
Common symptoms of acid reflux are:
Heartburn: a burning pain or discomfort that may move from your stomach to your abdomen or chest, or even up into your throat
Regurgitation: a sour or bitter-tasting acid backing up into your throat or mouth
Other symptoms of acid reflux disease include:
Bloating
Bloody or black stools or bloody vomiting
Burping
Dysphagia -- a narrowing of your esophagus, which creates the sensation of food being stuck in your throat
Hiccups that don't let up
Nausea
Weight loss for no known reason
Wheezing, dry cough, hoarseness, or chronic sore throat
How Is Acid Reflux Disease Diagnosed?
It's time to see your doctor if you have acid reflux symptoms two or more times a week or if medications don't bring lasting relief. Symptoms such as heartburn are the key to the diagnosis of acid reflux disease, especially if lifestyle changes, antacids, or acid-blocking medications help reduce these symptoms.
If these steps don't help or if you have frequent or severe symptoms, your doctor may order tests to confirm a diagnosis and check for other problems. You may need one or more tests such as these:
Barium swallow (esophagram) can check for ulcers or a narrowing of the esophagus. You first swallow a solution to help structures show up on an X-ray.
Esophageal manometry can check the function of the esophagus and lower esophageal sphincter.
pH monitoring can check for acid in your esophagus. The doctor inserts a device into your esophagus and leaves it in place for 1 to 2 days to measure the amount of acid in your esophagus.
Endoscopy can check for problems in your esophagus or stomach. This test involves inserting a long, flexible, lighted tube with a camera down your throat. First, the doctor will spray the back of your throat with anesthetic and give you a sedative to make you more comfortable.
A biopsymay be taken during endoscopy to check samples of tissue under a microscope for infection or abnormalities.
Acid reflux is when some of the acid content of the stomach flows up into the esophagus, into the gullet, which moves food down from the mouth. Despite the name, heartburn has nothing to do with the heart.
The stomach contains hydrochloric acid, a strong acid that helps break down food and protect against pathogens such as bacteria.
The lining of the stomach is specially adapted to protect it from the powerful acid, but the esophagus is not protected.
A ring of muscle, the gastroesophageal sphincter, normally acts as a valve that lets food into the stomach but not back up into the esophagus. When this valve fails, and stomach contents are regurgitated into the esophagus, the symptoms of acid reflux are felt, such as heartburn.
caffeine
alcohol
a high intake of table salt
a diet low in dietary fiber
eating large meals
lying down within 2 to 3 hours of eating a meal
consuming chocolate, carbonated drinks, and acidic juices
Acid reflux usually produces heartburn, whether it is due to a single episode of overeating or persistent GERD.
Heartburn is an uncomfortable burning sensation that occurs in the esophagus and is felt behind the breastbone area. It tends to get worse when lying down or bending over. It can last for several hours and often worsens after eating food.
The pain of heartburn may move up toward the neck and throat. Stomach fluid can resach the back of the throat in some cases, producing a bitter or sour taste.
If heartburn occurs two or more times a week, it is known as GERD for short.
Other symptoms of GERD include:
dry, persistent cough
wheezing
asthma and recurrent pneumonia
nausea
vomiting
throat problems, such as soreness, hoarseness, or laryngitis (voice box inflammation)
difficulty or pain when swallowing
chest or upper abdominal pain
dental erosion
bad breath
Risks and complications
Without treatment, GERD can lead to serious complications in the long term, including an increased risk of cancer.
Persistent exposure to stomach acid can damage the esophagus, leading to:
Esophagitis: the lining of the esophagus is inflamed, causing irritation, bleeding, and ulceration in some cases
Strictures: damage caused by stomach acid leads to scar development and difficulties swallowing, with food getting stuck as it travels down the esophagus
Barrett's esophagus: a serious complication where repeated exposure to stomach acid causes changes in the cells and tissues lining the esophagus with potential to develop into cancer cells
Both esophagitis and Barrett's esophagus are associated with a higher risk of cancer.
